Now, did you have any black troops assigned when
you were in Germany or when you were in France? No.
Did you have any contact at all with any of them? Not
directly. Some of them were artillery, all right,
and
I'd say that in general they didn't have a very good
reputation at the time, but most of them were
quartermasters, support troops, not very many in
the front line combat troops. Why didn't they have
a good reputation? What was their reputation?
Well,
I think that in general they were considered to be
less intelligent,
less qualified, and of course the intelligence
matter is is an uncertain thing at all, but
certainly their background, their culture and
all, they just were not up to the standard of the
usual United States White troops. They hadn't had
the same background, and they didn't have quite
the same motivation. They didn't have quite the
same level of skills. They had not participated
fully in our schooling and that sort of thing in
those days.
but I certainly owe it to the United States Army for
changing my attitude by the blacks. Where I was
reared, my family and everything certainly had
discriminated against them, considered them to
be inferior. They were servants or whatever. Of
course that was my attitude along when I grew up.
And did you have servants in your household when
you grew up? on a regular basis, but black women
came to do our washing and to help out at times. Of
course, even as poor as we were, you know, we could
afford to have that kind of, yeah. How about in the
field on your small farm? No, no, we didn't have any
outside labor at all. We did all the work ourselves
and their family. I did that. Now in my father's
business, he did have some blacks who worked for
him. Of course, they were always at the lower
position.
They were highly segregated, of course, in all
aspects. So I was reared under a culture of sharp
discrimination. I went to the army after they
integrated, after I became acquainted with some
fine black people and military schools and other
ways for getting over my discrimination against
blacks. Okay, now Truman desegregated the Armed
Forces and started in 1947-48 and that was carried
through into the early 1950s and the war in Korea.
Did your reserve units then start accepting
blacks? Sure did. I've had some fine black
officers. The Army Reserves did that before the
National Guard did too.
We had some black soldiers in my reserve artillery
units around.
Many of them, on average, they were as good
soldiers as I had in the white soldiers at that
time.
So there again, that helped me get over my
discrimination.
Was there much resistance in the reserves when
Truman desegregated? Generally, no. In certain
areas, yes. Like my organization in Arkansas
seemed to have more difficulty in accepting them
than the ones in Texas. Really? Why do you think
that would be? Well, I think that Arkansas
was still a little more rural oriented and that the
blacks had a minor role in the rural areas of
Arkansas still to a greater extent than they had in
metropolitan areas in Texas where many of our
troops were. Louisiana had more trouble, I had
some organizations there, had more trouble
integrating the blacks into the units. I think
that's because they were a higher percentage and
because in general the blacks on the average in
Louisiana were not as well educated as the ones in
Texas.
So it wasn't without difficulty, but I wouldn't
say it was a major handicap.
Now let's get back to your post-war career. Why'd
you decide to come back to Texas? You've been a man
of the world now. I was on leave from Texas A&M and
never had any other intention to come back to Texas
A&M.
You never had any other desire, now that you've
seen a lot of the country. In fact, I was stimulated
by my experience with the dining hall of the
Department of Texas A&M, fully intended to come
right back and make a career in food services. I had
done well in the dining hall, and Cliff Hotard had
told me that that if he decided to leave, he was
going to recommend me to replace him. Of course, I
was very young at that time. We were naive about it.
Sure enough, during the time I was gone, Cliff
Hotar did leave and went to Dallas. So I wrote back
to President Bolton and said that I was going to
leave and that I'd like to be considered for job to
replace Cliff Oktard. I was that cocky. I got a nice
letter back from President Bolton saying of
course that that wasn't possible at the time.
Old Jay Penniston, Cliff Oktard's
brother-in-law replaced him. I did come back and
go to work for Jay Penniston.
In the same capacity? capacity exactly, but I got
into academics sort of accidentally at that time,
because several of the professors in the Animal
Science Department were, had gone, were in the
military services for instance. D.W. Williams
head of department was in the Army, and F.I.
Dahlberg, who was acting head, his enrollment
increased a little bit at that time, I was off in the
afternoon from one to five, so he came over and
propositioned me to help him out with their
freshman animal science laboratories, which I
started doing because I still loved the animal
science field too.
And after I did that successfully for a little
while, the animal science department started
paying half my salary. And so I got into the
instructor business in animal science, got
interested again, enrolled and resumed my
graduate work. I was wondering why you went back to
graduate school. Well that's why. I got involved
with the animal science department again just
kind of accidentally because they needed help. I
just volunteered to give them some. Connected
again with Roy Snyder, who was running the Meats
Laboratory. Got interested again in the Meats
aspects. So I resumed my graduate work for the
master's degree. Obviously, I didn't have to do
anything about that. I had to get graduate work. So
I say resumed. What I did is to enroll and take the
second half of organic chemistry, eight years
after I'd taken the first half. I was encouraged by
some people, like one of the major influences my
whole life was Professor C.B. Gottlieb, who was
head of the genetics department. And I'd say of all
the people that I was associated with during my
entire academic career, he was the most admired
man. Why was that? What qualities did he have?
Because he was so brilliant. But yet, and such an
outstanding teacher, but still took such an avid
interest in all of his students. Just such an
outstanding man.
And I'd say that he keeps a carrot in front of me.
Stimulates you, complimenting you along the way,
sign you, Keep stretching your capability,
leading you forward.
I know now that he duped me about one thing, one of
the statistics, theoretical statistician, a man
named Fisher. Professor Godfrey always gave us a
basis for any statistical operation we're doing.
We had to derive equations and all. He told me he'd
never been able to figure out how Fisher derived a
certain equation. Would I go to the library and
study Fisher's book and explain it? Which I did,
and I'm mighty proud of myself that I could explain
that. I know now that that's just a trick. Gotta be
about to know that backwards and forwards. So
yeah. He just wanted you to learn that. Yeah, I got
into it. We had a small class. The first semester of
statistics, we must have had maybe 10 in the class,
and the second semester of statistics, there
weren't but three of us in that class at the time.
One of them was an Indian student, from India, and
also a guy named Morris Garber, who was a Jewish
fellow, and me. When Godfrey would send us to the
board to work out equations or something, I'd
always been good at math. I was terribly
embarrassed that by the time I finished, both of
them were already through. I found out later that
this Indian fellow had a master's degree in
mathematics from Harvard.
And Morris Garber was just one of the real
brilliant guys. Made a career in teaching
statistics first year and then at the University
of California. So I was overmatched in that class.
Then you decided to go on and get a PhD, and this was
at Michigan State. Why did you choose Michigan
State? Why didn't you stay here? Well,
in the first place, I was still under financial
stress, young family. But we got an opportunity to
apply for what was called General Education Board
fellowships of the Rockefeller Foundation. Now
that was a the general education board was an
operation of Rockefeller where he was hoping to
increase the training of professional people in
the colleges of the south.
So I was awarded one of those fellowships so that I
could go anywhere I chose and I By that time I was
active in national meats societies, the
reciprocal meat conference specifically, and I
learned to respect a man named L.J. Bratzler at
Michigan State University
because he had the best blend of the theoretical
and practical knowledge of meats of anybody in the
country, in my opinion. So I went to Michigan State
University to work with him.
That's why I chose Michigan State actually. This
must have been a great cultural shock for you to go
and become a Yankee for a couple of years. Well it
was. To see snow. It was. I remember we left College
Station in September. It was 105 degrees and we got
to East Lansing, Michigan. It was 60 or something
like that. My young family and I immediately had
respiratory problems. And we were not looking
forward to spending winters in the frozen north.
Remember, my wife and I spent our first winter
together at Onalaska, Wisconsin, and so we were
not unfamiliar with the north.
But I just came. appreciate enough and praise
enough the people in the Animal Science
Department, the Animal Husbandry Department of
Michigan State University, how they embraced us,
took us in, made us feel welcome. Did you get the
same quality student-teacher relationship at
Michigan State, do you feel, that you had here?
Yes, I did. Outstanding.
I got into biochemistry up there. Was one of the
pioneers in the animal husbandry department to
work in food science and really take up the
background of chemistry required for that.
But the
statistics professor, a man named Beaton, was a
Texan. He graduated from Baylor University,
where he got his Ph.D. But anyway, that was taught
in the math department up there. Brasler lived up
fully to my expectation. He was a really fine man
with an unusual mastery of theoretical and
practical aspects of meats.
So I'm certain that I had some divine guidance or
something there. It was a very, very fine
experience. This must have really broadened you
because you had all your undergraduate and
master's degree here at Texas A&M. This must have
been a good experience for you. Well it was, but
still the coursework I've taken here was up to the
standard of Michigan State. The chemistry
courses I had here were very, very rigorous. That
gave me excellent training background for the
biochemistry work. The statistics I had with God
be here, excellent.
So while I worked hard at Michigan State, It wasn't
beyond the capability at all, based upon very good
background in Texas A&M. Okay, and then when you
graduated with your PhD, did you have the job
waiting for you here? Yes, I was on leave from a
position in the Animal Science Department all the
time I was at Michigan State.
It was an obligation on the part of Animal Science
that I wouldn't I did not have any subsidy of any
kind from Texas A&M, so I could have taken an
employment elsewhere. My wife- Did you consider
that? Yes, we were offered a job in Chicago. Okay.
Had almost twice the salary that I could make at
Texas A&M. Really? My wife- Where? Where in
Chicago? Well, at the American Meat Institute
Foundation,
a research organization funded by the Packers. at
the University of Chicago. My wife and I seriously
considered that. We also could have stayed at
Michigan State University. Really? They would
have given you an assistant professorship? Well,
no, I don't know what the rank was, but I think yes,
probably assistant professor. There was an
extension position in Meach that they were
starting that they talked to me about. Never made a
firm offer. My wife and I considered everything,
and we decided life was too short to live in
Chicago, and we came right back to Texas A&M. Had
the same salary I left for, $5,700 a year.
So that, again, must have been divine guidance,
because within two years after we had decided
that, well, three years later, the whole American
Meat Institute Foundation thing was zeroed out by
the packing industry. So we would not have had a
very long career with them.
By that time I was department head of the Animal
Science Department. Why did you decide not to
accept that position up at Michigan State? Sounds
like a good starting point. Oh, we were just two
provincial Texans. You just wanted to come back to
Texas? Just wanted to come back to Texas. That's
where we had our roots. We just liked Texas, and
just like Texas A&M. Liked what I was doing with the
meat section, the animal science people here.
Jack Miller, who lives right here right now, was
department head.
We were very fond of him. So we decided that
the financial difference wasn't worth it. In June
of 1950, the North Koreans invaded the South
Koreans, and yet you were in the reserves at this
time, and you were not called into active duty. Why
was that? Well, our reserve outfit wasn't called.
We surely were vulnerable to a call. Even though
you were in the artillery? You weren't called? I
mean- Well, because we were in a military
organization, that is the C and By that time, I
believe, I'm not sure exactly whether we were in
the 90s. You were in the Armored Field Artillery.
You were the commander of the 352nd Armored Field
Battalion. Okay, that's 22nd Armored Division or
something like that, so you see that no major units
were called at all. Individual reservists were
called, but not any. reserves that were
functioning in larger military, no large
military organization was called at all. So of
course- So you relied on individuals that they
needed and- That's right, that's right. And of
course recruiting for the reserves was mighty
easy along the time because that was one way of
carrying out a person's military
responsibility. Well what's the effect of that
war on the reserves? Increasing desire to
volunteer? We had fantastic capability. We had a
lot of ROTC cadets in our military outfit for
instance. It wasn't unusual to have enlisted men
with master's degrees. We had fantastic
capability during the draft period in the
reserves. We'd have a waiting list There was no
recruiting problem, whatever. Would you think of
people who would rather be in the reserves than
volunteer for active duty? Do you have any
feelings on that? Certainly not. As my sons do
that, that was one alternative. It was a good
alternative where they would have been able to
make a contribution in case of general war or
whatever. So I thought that it was an intelligent
decision.
Did you volunteer for duty, active duty in Korea?
No. What did you think about the war itself?
Oh, I had mixed emotions about it. I felt like I
really didn't have enough knowledge to have a firm
opinion or attitude about it. I deplored the
no-win tactics that we used there and used later in
Vietnam. Because any experience I had is you
exercised every superiority you could. Of course
by that time we had nuclear capability, extremely
dominant forces in the world. Of course I thought
we should have tried to win the war, just like
MacArthur apparently thought so.
Were you in favor of using, I know that you weren't
in a position of military power, but did you go
along with MacArthur or were you in favor of
airstrikes north of the Yellow River and using the
nuclear capability? All of my training had been to
try to to engineer superiority and use it to the
maximum. That's the way you win battles and save
lives. So you bet, I sure was for exercising
our superior strength and advantage in any way we
could. Still am.
Unfortunately, we've lost a lot of that edge along
I'm going to deplore that. I'm sorry, babe.
Let's talk for a minute about the effects of
McCarthyism and really rampant anti-communism
in the 1950s throughout this country. What effect
did it have on the reserves? Any?
Boy, I don't know. know of any. I'd say that in
general the thinking people, well-educated
people, did not favor McCarthy tactics and really
thought that the threat was being exaggerated.
Though
nobody really was interested in having any
organized resistance. There weren't as, there
just wasn't as likely, people were not as likely to
take up a cause and take up the other side among
people that I associated with. Here at Texas A&M?
Yeah, right.
And then the reserves and wherever they were
inclined to try to further their own careers.
They were generally Anglo-Saxon, Protestant,
conservative people. Okay, and at this time, in
the 1950s, you were in the Army Reserve with a con
group. What's the con group? Let's see what this
is.
That is the,
let's see, during that time, you see, I was at
Michigan State University, so really that was
non-assigned
personnel,
and these were people that were authorized to
retain their commissions. They were not paid for
any drills. So you were sort of inactive reserve.
That's right. You see, during the period I was in 51
to 53 at Michigan State University, I didn't have
time for any reserve activities, and I didn't
participate in any reserve activities at all. So
they pretty much gave you time off. Control group
is what that is. The abbreviation for that is
control group. Okay, and then you returned to
Research and Development Unit. That's right.
What types of functions did you have there? The
Research and Development Unit was composed of
faculty members at Texas A&M University. They met
for points only, and this was composed of Navy, Air
Force, Army people. Fred Benson, for instance,
was in it from the Navy side. Again, we were not paid
for drills. We met on campus in one of the lecture
rooms somewhere.
We would go for two weeks of active duty somewhere
in the summer. Actually, I wasn't with it long
enough ever to go into that. It was a pool of people
that had good technical training based upon their
professional qualifications. Were there
certain things that you would take out in the field
in research and development? Were there any new
developments that you had to experiment with? No.
It was a seminar type group. And they were, as far as
I know, was assigned in your mission. It was just
kind of a holding group for technically qualified
people. And we were exposed to advances and
developments of weaponry, tactics, or whatever,
but not called- So it was more educational then?
Yes, it was. Maintained skills and developed
skills further. Okay, and then in 1955 to 1959 you
became the CO of a battalion. Yeah, I resumed that.
I was commander of a battalion before I went to
Michigan and really assumed command again of the
same battalion. The battalion had been
re-designated, but it was the same outfit as
headquarters right here. I see, but you were
never, did you ever have a command of a company?
Well, I had the command of a battery in World War II.
So that would put you in line and give you the
experience for the command of a battalion. Sure.
As you say, I came out of World War II a major. That's
beyond the company level kind of grade. I was field
grade officer. What was your rank then? became the
company commander of the 343rd Fuel Artillery. I
was a major. You were still a major at that time.
Matter of fact, early on I was a major and I was
pretty resentful of the fact that I commanded a
battalion for three or four years and never got
promoted to lieutenant colonel because at that
time I was considered to be too young to lieutenant
colonel.
So that proved to be lucky later. What did you do in
the battalion, the field artillery battalion,
basically training? Oh yes, yes we trained and my
battalions
we would sometimes go for weekend training Fort
Hood for firing exercises. We did just like we did
in training in the active army. Okay and how many
men did you have under your command? Well a
battalion we were authorized at that time I
believe 80 percent of full strength So by that time
I think the battalion was about 400 men, officers
and men. How many staff officers did you have
working under you? About a dozen, something like
that. What was the quality of the reserve? Was it
still high? The quality of reserves around Bryan,
Texas has always been outstanding because
there's so many graduates of Texas A&M and they
chose to stay active.